everybody welcome to impact theory you
were here my friends because you believe
that human potential is nearly limitless
but you know that having potential is
not the same as actually doing something
with it so our goal with this show and
company is to introduce you to the
people and ideas that are going to help
you actually execute on your dreams all
right today's guest is a globally
recognized leader in memory improvement
brain performance and accelerated
learning but no one would have predicted
that when he was a kid a serious
childhood accident left him with a
traumatic brain injury and a significant
learning disability
but instead of simply accepting defeat
he set about making up for a
shortcomings through an obscene amount
of hard work he began sneaking comic
books after bedtime to practice reading
and something about the collision of the
words images and the superhero mindset
spoke to him and for the first time he
began to make progress but despite this
he continued to struggle having to work
two or three times as hard as everyone
else to achieve lesser results after
exhaustion caused him to fall down a
flight of stairs and sustained yet
another brain injury he realized
something had to change
if he was going to truly overcome his
learning disability he was going to have
to dramatically improve his efficiency
at learning itself this began an
obsession with the brain and the how of
learning an obsession he would
ultimately turn into quick learning a
revolutionary accelerated learning
system that now has a bevy of celebrity
clients and students in over 150
countries his hyper effective techniques
have been sought out by the likes of
Virgin Nike Zappos SpaceX Harvard and
singularity University and he is
directly trained or shared the stage
with such luminary global leaders as
Elon Musk Sir Richard Branson and the
Dalai Lama his teachings have been
featured in prestigious worldwide media
including the New York Times best seller
use your brain to change your age please
help me in welcoming the man
best-selling author Steven Kotler called
the super hero whose superpower is
learning itself the host of the
phenomenal podcast quick brain gym quick
welcome and good to be here it's good to
have you here this is our second time
doing this bad boy and I have to say
you're probably of all the people that
I've interviewed you probably person
I've gotten the closest with off-camera
so it's a lot of fun to bring you back
and talk about different things so
people should go sign up for your
courses look at all this have you got so
much amazing content out there about the
actual how-to of learning so I want to
start somewhere a little bit different
do it talk to me about being the son of
immigrant parents so my parents
immigrated here to United States from
Asia we grew up like a lot of a lot of
individuals that work really hard grew
up in the back of a laundromat and they
had many different jobs and you know I
think one of the things that that's
important for all of us is just the work
ethic you know to be able to put in like
you do the incredible hours as an
entrepreneur or as a visionary to do
whatever it takes because I don't
believe that there's a necessary magic
pill but I think there's a process and
doing the doing the work is very
important you know I don't want people
to believe that there's a silver bullet
also do you have a great memory or you
have this great success or great
relationship or health and people always
ask what's the one thing I could do and
I always tell people that you have to do
you have to do most of it right and be
smart about it but you have to put in
the work because you know a lot of times
people see on social media they see all
of the success but what they don't see
is the hustle and as this garyvee talks
about and the I think what you as they
say what you practice in private
they say you rewarded for in public but
g/f do you have to do the work and I
think that's where I got my work I think
the challenge is growing up with a brain
injury and labeled the boy with a broken
brain I had to work so much harder as
everybody else and you wonder why that
while you're not getting those results
and so um so I got my my discipline from
my for my parents and I love them for my
really say that they are my pair of my
superheroes and anything good that's
come out of me it's really a product of
a
them setting an example what were they
telling you is you were going through
all of that I mean your story really is
one of like grit and perseverance and I
think your story would be a lot easier
to understand if it had been like really
linear you get the injury and then you
like have the magic mum you figure it
out and it's all roses from there but
you actually end up working your ass off
only to then like fall again literally
fall again what are they telling you
through that how are they encouraging
you how do they become your superheroes
it would be night it would be really
clean sometimes life is messy right and
success is not from just a to be in just
a straight line it goes all over the
place and so I would have loved that my
story was oh I had this brain injury and
all of a sudden you know this is
accident and you know I was been by a
radioactive elephant at his incredible
memory or something like that but it
wasn't quite that I suffered and
struggled I had the brain injury was
five years old and I suffered all
through elementary school all through
middle school all through high school
and and so it's like a good 14 years and
a lot of it was you know this thing
where it's even as a young age maybe I
was pretending that everything was fine
and I'd be struggling it's kind of like
that metaphor of a duck on a pond and
you see it's like all calm and relaxed
but underneath it's just like hustling
really really fast and people don't
always see what's below the iceberg but
for me I struggle privately and my
parents because I grew up with these
challenges and I didn't have a lot of
people to talk to because when you have
feel like yet you're broken you don't
connect with a lot of people so on top
of everything I was also painfully shy I
was introverted but I was also shy and
very reserved and I would always sit in
the corner and I honestly I've never
heard talk about this publicly but I
asked everybody you know what their
superpower is and I feel like that my
superpower growing up as an insecure kid
and felt like he was broken and taught
that by adults that that my superpower
is being invisible whoa like I didn't
want to be seen I mean I ultimately did
want to be seen and I want to be heard
like most wasn't accepted and
acknowledged but I didn't want the
spotlight like I would do for example my
parents instilled like this work
think about working working hard and so
I would do a book report and even though
it's more difficult for me and to the
point where I'd be like okay I have it I
was done and but if the teacher asked me
in high school to presented in front of
a class I would actually lie and say it
into it and I would take a zero and
because I was so terrified of being in
front of a group of people and and I
would throw it out on the way out of
class and it was really scary but my but
my parents always held that there was
there were there was more that there was
purpose that was that there's a reason
that I was going through these
challenges I mean my mother actually
went into became a special ed teacher
because she just really wanted to help
because the negative you because of what
you want to get to what I went through
and so because they're very caring like
that but the challenge is we don't know
what we don't know and and they did the
best they could be able to help me but
what they did instill in me it was that
there was a reason you know that through
going through struggles just like when
they came to this country now all of us
go through struggles right her health or
relationship whatever it is but through
struggles come come strengths and people
don't didn't talk about this as much and
you know I probably have a
post-traumatic you know stress from it
going through brain injury after brain
injury
there's also post-traumatic growth which
which you know like a lot of the as
widely talked about but there's some
people that go through immense amount of
trauma and difficulty and challenge but
they come out of it actually more
empowered that they wouldn't they say to
themselves that because of going through
this I found a new strength I found my
superpowers I found a new meaning in my
life I found a new level of commitment I
found a strength a mission if you will
and they wanted a lot of them the tests
that they won't trade that experience no
matter how painful it was at the time
for for anything and I find I find that
growing up with reading challenges and
you know I couldn't read for an extra
three years I pretended how to read well
you know and it's like um it's like the
imposter syndrome it's like they have
this image of how they want to be
projected to the world and then they
have this image of what they fear they
are and then they have their real who
they are but I think a lot of people are
suffering and overloaded and overwhelm
and they're depleted because they're
trying to hold these images in place you
know and
and then be themselves also as well in
different contexts was why I love you
because you are the same on Canberra and
off and there's there's a congruence
there's an authenticity that's there and
I feel like a lot of people expend
unnecessary amounts of energy trying to
hold up this image of their ideal self
to the world and they have this image
that they fear so it's going to be
revealed somebody else and so growing up
as a kid who couldn't read I would
pretend I understood things like
teachers would explain things and I
didn't want to be the only one who
didn't understand and I would pretend
but in private I was really suffering
and struggling and so on you know it's
one of those things where you wonder why
like my two biggest challenges growing
up we're learning and public speaking
which is the universe has a weird sense
of humor because that's what I do for my
god I mission now and so it's
interesting how things or how did you
push through that because so as somebody
who's seen you speak publicly you're so
good at it like you've so much energy
and enthusiasm and projected confidence
even if you're like secretly overcoming
something how how do you go through the
dark time of feeling like you've been
identified as the kid with the broken
brain really struggling truly like how
do you get your self-talk going in a
positive direction like everything would
be pushing back against you yeah I think
so it's even I even get nervous with
doing things like this and you know that
you know even being on camera or having
my picture taken or they're still this
residual I always get butterflies
incredible amounts of butterflies before
I go onstage every single time how I get
through it
I mean we talked about um we've talked
about previously about mindset and about
had the importance of having a growth
mindset and I always talk about the
second G for me is grit and then of the
three G's of the superhero right yeah
and I think so I think having a powerful
mindset being unstoppable or just having
the ability to go and and succeed
whatever success is for you you have dfw
so you have to be growing because we're
not growing then you're just you're
backsliding great but you also need a
level of grit and I think Ridd just like
growth is a muscle it's something that
you need to sharpen through
because through the challenge you get
though the change that comes from it I
would say that if I'm if I'm effective
having an impact on stage and we all
have a stage of our life whether it's on
a physical stage or you know just going
through our day right that I challenged
my my grid and I might literally do
persist I feel like that most successful
people on the planet that having the
level of impact that they want to have
to go through challenges and they did
that imagine of just like the hero's
journey that we've talked about many
times and and so how I get myself
through it I monitor myself talk because
I think that's important I feel like
with a name like quick you know you have
to be a runner right and so I had to be
a runner back in school and to be
careful getting speeding tickets and
everything else like that but I was
remember I was reading a book years ago
on preparing for a marathon and one of
the chapters again was on the psychology
of it and it said this verbatim you know
come the memory expert it said your MA
here your brain is like a supercomputer
and your self talk is the program that
will run so if you tell yourself you're
not good at remembering names you will
not remember the name and next person me
because you program your supercomputer
not to and I always tell people that and
now I don't I don't think the brain is
like a supercomputer it's I think it's a
it's a weak metaphor for for for what it
is because you know this was like a
living computer that could do so much
more and has different capabilities but
I would say that your self-talk is
important and it is the program that
will run and I would tell people to keep
it positive keep it empowering because
your mind is always eavesdropping on
your self-talk right and you have to be
careful what you say to yourself because
it's this unconscious command so I'll be
very careful like when I'm gonna get
nervous or I feel like I'm I think some
of the most successful people live at
the edge of their limits you know and
they play there also as well and so and
whenever I feel in my nervous system I
feel like I can't do it and I feel like
I really must do it because I feel like
how we do anything is how we do
everything when did you have that
realization that you could overcome some
of the fears by knowing what your
motives were you've had many guests to
address this and I really do feel and
congratulations also with Mel and Simon
those videos like you know
hundreds of millions of people watch it
and I feel like I was having this
conversation I did a talk in Silicon
Valley and afterwards Bill Gates comes
up to me and I asked what superpower he
could read one and he's like the ability
to read faster and I was like oh I could
totally help with that and and I I
believe in reading and I know you're an
avid avid reader and we share that
commonality other leaders are readers
but we're talking about the future
education and I was taking a the
approach from adult learning theory and
brain science and he was approaching it
from more technology and scale and
somebody who was listening ask the
question saying is there anything
missing you know what's missing absent
theory and technology and we were
talking about and we came to conclusion
is understanding human motivation like
that because motive matters right and
what drives us I always tell people that
there's a success formula I subscribe to
it I call it H cube that goes from your
head to your heart to your hands
especially in the personal development
space or where they teach about goals
that he could affirm things in your head
or think things in your head or
visualize things in your head but you're
not acting with your hand there's there
something that's missing right there's
an incongruence there and I tell people
is like you know check in with the
second date which is your heart which is
the symbol of like emotion the energy of
motion and so I feel like that's the
fuel that fuels the car that gets you to
take action
for something and I do believe what got
me through it is figuring out what my Y
was right I don't want people to suffer
the way I did if I can do anything about
it for me it's like no brain left behind
right because I I live with that
identity for so long and I my my message
to people whether it's on stage or on
podcast or anything is that you know we
are more than what we're demonstrating
that we've been sold this lie that
people are taught through school like
when I do these demos and I understand
stage memorize hundred names and words
and numbers forwards and backwards and
it appears effortlessly I always tell
people I don't do this impress you I do
this Express to you what's really
possible because the truth is everyone
can do is to and so much more apply
towards creativity and focus and flow
and problem-solving and thinking and in
really overcoming the biggest challenges
of their life and maybe even the world
the challenges we were taught a lot we
were taught a lie that somehow our
intelligence our potential our learning
memory somehow is fixed or creativity of
sex or thinking is fixed like our shoe
size and what we've discovered you know
as you know more human about brain
science in past two decades we
discovered more than the previous two
thousand years and what we know is that
we're grossly under estimating its
capacity our own capacity to be able to
grow to be able to contribute to improve
our intelligence and our influence and
our impact and I'm really I want to kind
of pull the veil behind and just say hey
this is about transcending you know this
is about ending the trance I mean the
trans better that we're not good enough
you know that we're not smart enough
then we you're not this genius and I'm
telling the truth
and the truth is people could we're
faster and we're smarter than we think
and not just to be able to rote memorize
things but be able to really solve
significant challenges and maybe that
these challenges that we're going
through or the lessons that we need to
learn the most and then some people who
learn those lessons feel compelled to be
able to share that voice with other
people so it's not just one candle you
know we just can set things ablaze you
know so what are some of the key problem
that you personally want to solve that
you think we face as a society like what
are those major movements um so a lot of
these conversations you and I have we've
had with our mutual friend Peter
Diamandis over at XPrize I was at the
very early stages of their education
literacy prizes when they first launched
it and and so I think for me my platform
is education and I feel like that
growing up if anyone's watching this
feels like they're overloaded overwhelm
and they can't keep up I always tell
people that I don't think it's
completely their fault it's just we all
grew up with the 20th century education
that prepared us for a 20th century
world which has the turn of the century
was working in factories and farms and
assembly line and our education system
was married to that it was assembly line
one size fits all cookie cutter approach
towards education teaching us things
about what to learn math history science
Spanish for all things we can find
online nowadays right so what do you
need to be able to regurgitate that
information for but it wasn't it was
about what to learn but not how to learn
and you know how to think for yourself
how to solve problems how to be creative
all the things that you can't outs or
is too you know too intelligent like
automated or technology or you can
outsource to Asia in our value in this
world is really our bill our creativity
right because that's not something
that's easily outsourced our ability to
create value be creators take our vision
and turn them into reality take the
invisible and make it visible but where
are the classes on that writing on how
to be able to live your your best
version of yourself that's why I love
this and the conversations that we have
and the conversations that you're
bringing out to the world because
nowadays you know we live in this
serious thing I get to work nearly
mention with SpaceX and Elon and suction
and rocket scientist and always in but I
mean they're don't think about that
we're living in a world of autonomous
electric cars and spaceships that are
going to Mars bar vehicle choice when it
comes to learning it's like we're
choosing like a horse and buggy alright
that's our choice and that we wonder why
wild is taking so long this is so hard
and so difficult but it's not our fault
we just weren't prepared for this world
that we're living in right now they say
that that if Rip Van Winkle you know the
gentleman who could slept for decades of
slumber right if you woke up today the
only thing he would recognize is our
schools and that's not a slight against
teachers like my mother is a
schoolteacher my my aunt's of the
college professor I love those
individuals because there are some of
the most hardworking individuals that I
know and I get to train a lot of them
but it's a systemic issue just like like
many challenges you know it doesn't grow
and as an evolve as much as the rest of
the world has but I love this because
right now classrooms you know they don't
have four walls I mean how many how many
people are watching this from how many
different countries right now and you
never know who's listening on the other
side and that motivates inspires the
heck out of me because what if someone
right now is watching this on their
smart device and they you know they're
in the middle of some third-world
country and they become the next Malala
or Elon Musk or or what have you and
that's that's what really juices me and
so education I feel like a lot of people
feel like that when they graduate school
they're they're learning is done they in
fact the two big dips and cognitive
performance is usually when people
graduate school and the second one is
when they retire from work stuff and
when people retire you know their mind
you know they feel like you know their
body is not too far
i 9ro because of that connection so have
you thought about what a new education
system would look like my approach has
always been going directly to the
student whoever the student of life
happens to be now I know in terms of
curriculum what I would change just
because I wouldn't focus so much on you
know on dates I think it's good to be
well-read because I think that
perspective is really important but I
would focus more on functional usable
tools and that would help people excel
in today's day and age you know the
ability to create the deal think
differently leadership skills ability to
work and manage teams collaboration
tools I think all those would be very
important I mean any of the learning
methodologies that we publish on how to
focus and how to concentrate on the
reason I focus on memory a lot even
though there's a lot of information
online there's people like oh why do I
need to memorize all this stuff if it's
available online and that's a valid
point there's two reasons I would say
number one I feel like because people
aren't memorizing things are losing
their ability to remember things because
they're outsourcing their brains to
their smart devices right I mean
everything is kept here so they don't
have to be able to keep it here and the
challenges is your I believe that the
mind is more like a muscle as opposed to
a supercomputer that's used at removes
discourse stronger with use but a lot of
people are using it as much as they used
to and so because think about it before
technology how would you have to
remember personal history and all your
lessons you pass it around like you know
share it over with stories like this and
that's why I love I love this kind of
context there'd be a fire here and we'd
be sharing this and to be part of like
who we are and I feel people are losing
that ability so I think storytelling is
so important to be able to teach right
interpersonal skills right we know that
IQ is is kind of it's erroneous right
this idea where you have a number and
it's yours for a rest of your life and
it's six and they can move and it
accurately describes your value in
society I think that's flawed I think
that we have multiple intelligences like
so generally in the United States we
reinforce two kinds of intelligence it's
like verbal linguistic and mathematical
like growing up that was like the SATs
is like verbal and the math right and if
you're not good at either one of them
like kid this is that determines whether
to go to a school and everything else
like that
but what about like interpersonal skills
I mean that's got to be at least as
important to be able their ability to
connect with individuals like what you
have in spades
what about like besides interpersonal
skills what about interpersonal skill
like just self-awareness because I you
know as Gary B talks about I think
self-awareness is a superpower like
awareness of yourself like you're your
own condition and what motivates you
would drive you your own beliefs
identity you're ready to be cultivated I
feel like I think so I do believe in a
combination of nature and nurture
I do believe people are born with
certain level of talent but as the
because you know it's cliche but it's
also true that that um that hard work
will be talent his talent doesn't work
hard right so I do believe you could
refine and train this I think when it
comes to children that use it's harder
to model and manage behaviors like
getting them to do something or stop
doing something but I think what we
could do because of children growing up
they're incredibly you know they have
the mirror neurons in their ways their
image they learn to imitation and such I
feel like that they'll it's what's
easier with modeling or being good role
model for kids and this goes for
coaching or any kind of relationship
with a human being is really to be an
example and really instead of model of
trying to manage certain you know micro
behaviors like the thousands and
hundreds and thousands of different
behaviors that your team has or your or
your children have I would say that it's
be better to really focus on
communicating like the values right said
the behaviors beliefs driven is aware
that we mean like focus on giving them
the belief system that leads into values
like I feel like in order people to
transcend to be able to end the trance
right that we talked about earlier that
a lot of people are just trying to
change a lot of times like I just did a
podcast on habits right how to be able
to adopt new habits and also delete and
you're rid of you know break bad habits
right and so a lot of people always want
to make it's usually make a change on
behavior they want to get themselves to
work out they want to get some of the
meditate they want to get themselves to
read more each day they want to give
themselves to X right or they want to
stop some behavior they want to stop
smoking they wanna stop eating this food
they want to stop I always tell people
stop checking your phone in the first
hour of the day I love and I and I just
that's like sacred time
me you know because I for me that's for
I think that if you want to be an elite
mental performer in a real life
superhero you don't want to start off by
checking the phone we talked about this
in the past because you're training
yourself to be reactive right you're
getting your dopamine or you're frying
your nervous system with all these like
shares comments and everything else like
that that you've said if I'm not
mistaken you sell your sovereignty we
just if you start by checking your phone
I love that so much because you're
reacting and firefighting to everyone's
like well I've been thinking everyone
would want so you're not really setting
you're not living you know that it's
you've heard this many times right if
you want to you in the first hour of the
day to win the rest in an immunity with
room in the day right and so anything
you want to stop so I say you want to
stop checking your phone right in the
morning then there's certain like that's
a behavior right but there's so many
other elements to be able to change
because something most behaviors don't
stick right and so like what I'm
thinking about when I want to transform
or transcend or make a real positive
change I'm looking all the other areas
of ourselves so I'm looking at for
example our environment or our people
setting up their environment to win a no
social change doesn't just happen at
this level of behavior but what you have
to change the environment so for example
if you want to stop eating a certain
food it helps to be able to have not
that not have that food in your home
right so you change the environment if
you want to read more it helps to help
set up your environment where you have
the books readily available where you're
going to read it could they perform you
know how I approach habit changes this
area of motivation and this trigger
right you want to trigger it to help
remind you to do the behavior right so
are you setting up the environment in a
way that triggers the behavior that you
want but not only the the environment
it's like the when and the where but
it's also behaviors also the
capabilities because a lot of people
want to change behavior but they're not
training in the abilities but I love a
lot about your work and your passion is
the area able to like ability those
acquisition new abilities for yourself
and also their goals to benefit the rest
of world but most people aren't training
those habits and there's capabilities
but also another level of change that we
need to address let's say everyone
someone's watching this may have
something that something they want to
change and it's not it's not sticking
then maybe it's not it's the environment
maybe to check about your habits but
maybe it's your beliefs and your values
some people will not get themselves to
read every day because they don't value
meaning every single day right some
people won't work to say the behavior
they want change is you know we did a
podcast how to remember names I could
teach them step by step on how to
remember the name of most people that
they meet yet they won't do it because
they don't value it or because that's
not important to them or they don't
believe that they can write just like we
talked about earlier saying your brain
is like a supercomputer and you know
yourself talk to the programmer run so
you tell yourself to not go to memory
names you will not remember the name the
next person you meet because your
program is supercomputer not to they
don't have a belief that enables that so
I say all behaviors believe driven if
you want to do this behavior whatever it
is journal whatever it is then you need
a belief that allows that to happen
because you bet the program that allows
it how do you get that belief because
you're going to feel like you're faking
it all right that's where most people
stop right they they think okay I get it
I hear what you're saying that if I am
able to shift my belief then I get a
different behavior but I don't believe
it
so now I'm just sort of faking it how do
you help people overcome it right and so
you mean so some people approach it like
they've done is quote where they fake it
to they make it right um so my thing
with belief is like when I do trainings
and groups or online my favourite way of
changing a belief is getting them to do
something they never thought they could
do because it opens up another
possibility right what so so for example
in 1954 Roger Bannister he broke the
four-minute mile right and so which is
amazing right throughout human history
nobody can run a mile in less than four
minutes after you if you look into it
how he was able to do it is he would
visualize himself crossing the finish
line looking at the clock and it says
359 because he knew that success is an
inside out process that first it had to
happen in here in order crafton out
there right um dr. Wayne Dyer has the
same as phrase where it's not
oh I'll believe it when I see it it's
like I'll see it when I believe it
because it's the opposite right and so I
always like modeling the outliers where
most people kind of just like kind of
dismiss them I was like well what's
what's going on there that allows this
person to get this kind of results right
and so with Roger Bannister he thought
in here be able to produce it outside
just like any innovator or inventor or
writer any creator right but what was
interesting is after that would happen
nobody could do it from the beginning
humanity all of a sudden one person does
it what happens after that everybody
yeah everyone starts doing it and so
that's the thing now what what happened
with their big change that year and you
know training methodology and nutrition
or know the change of belief right
because the belief back then was if you
ran a mile less than four minutes not
only would you die it was your heart
would explode in your chest and like
think about like that would and I'm a
runner right that would keep me not just
running that one kid me for money
performance that would give me from
running period right right and so my
thing is like that was a change of a
reference I was just shook up a belief
so my goal with people and when it comes
to learning is get themselves to do
something they never thought they could
do and then it opens up another
possibility it literally opens up their
their nervous system for something what
else could be possible now I would also
say that it all plays together where
it's not easy to say just to change a
belief overnight now that could be a
belief it's like a meta belief about
what beliefs are but people there's
there's technologies like Inception like
a dream of a dream your dream but I do
believe that we have more we have more
power to influence our thoughts and our
beliefs and so there are a lot of tools
and techniques out there that are
resources like when I grew up I you know
we didn't have any we have no money
right I had no education because I was a
very learning challenged I didn't know
any anybody right so I feel like it's
not when people are that's where they'll
go though when they when they hit lends
a gap stop gap between where they are
and where they want to be they'll say oh
I don't have the money and all the
education around the intelligence out of
the network or anything else like that
and you know what would you know as for
all incredible success you've had and
the value created for the world is that
is not about resources right because we
know a lot of people who who didn't have
any resources that were able to impact
the world
it's about our internal resources and
what I'm saying is optimizing our
environment optimizing our behaviors or
capabilities our beliefs and our values
and our identity right that the highest
level our identity because you can't
just change your belief or your values
or your behavior even if you don't
believe you're that kind of person and
that's why I kind of always go to the
superhero mythos because I want people
that you get to claim that identity I
call it a superhero you that version of
ourselves that we're not waiting for
Superman or bad
or Wonder Woman it's like you are Wonder
Woman you are Batman you are Superman
it's just we we have to commit ourselves
to be able to unleashing that good I'm a
huge believer in identity driving
behaviors I have a hard time explaining
to people though how to adopt a new
identity how do you how have you done it
in your own life I think that's the best
job I mean my identity I mean obviously
this is a work in progress right I would
say that I would start with the they
call it the two smallest world words in
the English language but there are two
most powerful words in English language
since I am right I am because whatever
you put after that determines your
destination or your your destiny right
and I think your identity is who you
believe you are and I feel like what
we're talking about playing to the edge
of our limits and really playing there
and living in that place where we're
stretching you know I do believe and I
get inspired every time I see your
interest or you like it's like 4:30 and
you're working out you're doing your
your your work but that's who you are
but you don't have to fight it because
you can't imagine yourself not doing
that and that's the level of that I
think it's what's most important so I
would think about going through an
exercise and I've done this with friends
I've had them sit or in groups we do
these conferences and such that finds I
have people pair up with someone they
don't know and what they're going to do
is they're going to do an exercise I am
and they're going to talk of it they're
literally going to fill in the blanks
for three minutes until I call time well
so you have to go like and you could do
this right now like if you were to fill
in I am blank like I would say you know
I am a student I am a teacher I am a son
I'm a you know all this and but
eventually I'll get to a point where I
don't know what else to say and that's
what the real interesting answers come
out of right because it's a great way
for networking knowing somebody else but
it also shows us this really big
tapestry of our life to the point we
content of right now where we could I
relate to these aspects of ourselves and
I think it's a nice exercise when we
talk about self-awareness being a
superpower really knowing who we think
we are because if we don't believe that
we our public speaker or were great
parent or we're great learner or a
genius and we'll never be able to reach
our full potential because that will
always be the ceiling that we bump up
against
and also you know when I'm talking to
individuals and I'm interviewing them on
our podcast or just talking to
individuals like this I would be
thinking about especially high
performers because I think that genius
leaves Clues and I believe that it could
be replicated if you're willing to put
in the work and the learning and the
discipline to be able to do that then I
want to know really I want to know their
beliefs I want to know what they value
because if I don't know that I'm just
working on step-by-step hacks and
everything else it won't stick because
it's missing a huge part so I want to
model like their behaviors their values
their beliefs and also who they think
they are that allows them to do those
accomplish those amazing things in their
life
and what are some of the clues the
genius leaves so it's interesting what
I'm talking about these levels of change
right the identity level is the who
write you know the five W's in the a
tree learn back in school the identity
is who somebody is when we're talking
about beliefs and values that's the why
why they do what they do when we're
talking about capabilities that's the
how right that's the habit right the
skill acquisition but we're talking to
behavior that's the what that what
they're doing right and then when we
talk about environment that's really the
where and the when
right so I'm going to always going back
with I want to create change create a
new habit create new level of learning
for somebody I'm addressing those
different levels and I if I ignore one
with somebody else or myself then it's
not going to stick break you knock out
that congruence where it's going to
affect where it becomes second nature
and so going back to this I think if I'm
modeling genius and genius leaves Clues
I'm thinking about Kay where are they
and when are they doing these things so
certain people are early bird some
people are night owls so I could teach
people like I teach people how to read
one book a week
I really think leaders or readers that
in order to stay competitive in today's
day and age if somebody has decades of
experience and they put it into a book
and you sit down and read then in a few
days
download decades in the days I mean I'm
preaching to choir for just watching but
that's that's a superpower right that's
a huge advantage and so I'm thinking
about but some people when I'm telling
them the practice and I get these
results in 30 you know about four or
five weeks where it's permanent where
they could read 300 percent faster with
the same but better comprehension
essentially read something in 20 minutes
it takes it only takes normal people an
hour the reason what but you have to
practice but some people will practice
at inopportune times of the day and they
won't get the same results so part
self-awareness knowing you're what they
call your chronotype when's the optimal
time to do this because for depending on
your body type there's certain times a
day it's better to work out the spare
times a day to be able to make love the
better times a day to be able to read to
check email to ask for a raise so I
would think about like geniuses found
that find their element their sweet spot
and they set up their routines and their
rituals throughout the day to be able to
align with the time when their most
productive right if they're not if you
don't have a lot of energy in the
morning working out it's probably not as
good as doing some other time so the
when and the where and setting up your
environment for success because all your
triggers are there that allow them so I
think geniuses set themselves up so for
example they have their laptop but they
only use their laptop for work and it's
anchored that's part of their
environment it's anchored to get them in
the flow States to be able to write or
be productive they don't use their
laptop to watch binge on Netflix right
they have a very they have an iPad that
they use when they do that because
that's the state that they want to
anchor for that and they don't use that
iPad to do work you know set up your
environment like your bedroom like we
just did a whole episode on sleep acts
and how to optimize your sleep because
that's a big you know personal challenge
for me for many years because I had
suffered from sleep apnea it was a
breathing disorder I stopped breathing
200 times a night for at least 10
seconds which is the equivalent of
somebody coming in to choking
suffocating you 200 times a night and so
I would actually reason why I'm so
adamant about productivity and learning
hacks is because for the longest time
for literally five years three and you
know this I've slept about 90 minutes to
two hours a night total and you know how
you feel when you get like one bad
nights of sleep and how like where your
focus is your energy level and your how
I get these horrible migraines and it's
forced me to double down in my practices
you know in terms of like I've had a
limit amount of time I have to focus on
the things that really matter resources
and stuff then anyway going back to like
my bedroom is sacred space right I don't
do work in there I keep it because
that's my trigger to be able to rest on
a parasympathetic space I set up my
environments on my blackout curtains I'm
a crowning pad so to optimize my restful
sleep that I do get so environment so
genius leaves clues they set up genius
environments for themselves and then the
behaviors most people know if they're
intuitive you know these people are are
investing themselves there's they're
investing in self care I would tell
people that self love and self care is
not selfish a lot of people you know
there
for their friends and their family and
their clients everybody else but they're
not refilling their cups so I think that
we have to be you know grow givers
meaning we have to we grow sway more to
give to other people so we have more
impact with other individuals so the
behaviors are reading each day and
putting the other your to-do list and
your I think having or not to do this is
so important having being sleep-deprived
for so many years yeah I think a lot of
people I'm super sensitized to it but I
think one of the success ratures people
have should have is just going through
and keeping consistent not to-do list
and I think the most successful
genius-level individuals one of the
clues that they leave is they're not to
do this is bigger than their to-do list
right they don't check their phone in
the more they don't take and you know
everything is hell yes or it's hell now
all right that's our filter system they
don't and you know they say no to good
so they guess yes to grade so behaviors
then you have the habits which and then
you have the beliefs and the values and
beliefs the values you know because I
watch this is one of the reasons why I
watch your show because I'm just hearing
all the time you listening these amazing
beliefs Doug from achievers in all every
area I mean it's amazing I mean you have
Wycliffe there you're not and like the
Mel and you have all these amazing
individuals but you see that there's a
pattern that's there right and there's
an art and but there's a science to it
there and there's an art to it and how
they express themselves and then I also
do believe that some of those successful
geniuses and I think genius it's not
just I could not have not IQ right I'm
talking about an incredible you know
artist I'm talking about in absolute I'm
talking to have a kid ninh in some area
and they haven't they're they're clear
about their identity about who they are
and who they are to the world and so but
I know what they what they do commit it
they do the work and they're committed
to lifelong learning and I feel like
that learning I always tell people and
we've taught this we have this
conversation that is knowledge is power
and learning is your superpower and I
think it's a superpower that we all have
it's just now we're not taught like
recently we had Quincy Jones in our
audience and I had to pull him on stage
right and I was just like I was like I
have to ask you you know we are the
world and Michael Jackson Oprah like you
know what did you have you overcome
these challenges that give these
problems that you had to be able to
create this you know this legacy and he
looked at me he's like Jim he's like I
don't have any problems I'm like what do
you mean you're like you're 84 you have
no problems and she's like no I have
and I was like wow like that little
shift of vocabulary changed everything
for me yeah because puzzles are like
riddles they can you could you could
solve so you could solve them right
there's answers for it as a change in
perspective and now is the thing about
growing up with superheroes reading
these comic books late at night when I'm
so impressionable is for me a superhero
more than anything represents hope do
you know what I mean that one person can
make a difference and a lot of
superheroes go through a lot of
challenges right when you think about
the most popular superheroes they're all
orphans like Wonder Woman Batman
Superman Iron Man spider-man they all
lost their parents you know and they all
threw these big challenges but through
it they found their their Dharma they
found their mission and I find that if
someone's watching this and they haven't
found it quite yet maybe I have a belief
that that their mission and that
people's mission their purpose and their
practice is looking for them also but
most of us aren't sensitized to it you
know because it's coming in different
forms and we're not open to it as much
and so my thing when it comes to success
rituals and high performance and making
an impact is that we all have that
sovereignty we all have that power and
whenever we put it out there and give it
out to somebody else like we're a
thermometer right the metaphor I always
talk about like where are the
thermometers or the thermostats and a
thermometer you think about the
functionality of it it just reflects
what the environment is giving it right
it just reflects the temperature and
stuff but a thermostat is different it
sets a standard it set the goal it set
the vision and the environment changes
along with it I feel like our happiness
our joy our levels of film in our
success is all dependent on where we put
the locus of control and I feel like we
have more power than we realize in these
cases and it's hard because we have to
fight media we to fight marketing that's
always telling us about all the things
that are going on in the world but we
live in an abundant universe right I
mean we talk about the matrix you know
which Atilla people are going to take
and that determines everything and every
single morning you know you determine
what color till you're going to take I
have to say it is fascinating to watch
you deal with the sleep issue because
going into it I wondered how your
beliefs were going to play right so a
lot of times the belief will kick in and
when the problem is
relatively easily the belief is intact
and everything is right with the
universe but dude you had to push for
years yeah and years and years like you
were saying 400 things that you tried to
overcome that how did you stay focused
committed like how do you push it the
dark times that's really my question
because your entire life is like a story
of grit and pushing through like the
darkest of times and I would say what
keeps me going is I have a belief that
everything can get better
like that's my self-talk when you when
it comes down to what my primary belief
is is I feel that that things could get
better because otherwise I didn't then I
would just give up right I had too many
examples of friends and family and just
people I don't know which are just
friends of my mind that have superseded
much more difficult situations than I
have the other thing that's helped me to
do is really focus on the rituals and
routines the habits the abilities that
really matter
you know the 80/20 rule because when I
have a certain amount energy I can only
do a certain amount of things and I want
I need to get more back and I'm still
doing the job quote unquote of most you
know three or four people you know going
on stage and traveling tips too but you
know like the kind of things that we do
but it forces me to focus on things
that's going to give maximum return and
we know and I think we do teach the
things that we need to learn the most I
think the best teachers are the best
students and I know I'm going through
this like I had surgery recently to
correct this and so my sleep has jumped
up for 90 minutes to two hours to about
four hours which doesn't sound like a
lot it's not perfect but it's progress
and that's my standard like I'm just I'm
never looking for perfection because I
don't think that the standard exists I'm
just looking to make incremental
progress you know when I wake up in the
morning I have my daily routine and it's
so fine-tuned because I think a lot of
people suffer from decision making
fatigue right then this is very strong
research saying that you can only make a
certain amount of good decisions a day
and after that is spent you can anymore
and that's really been fine-tuned in the
medical field with surgeons and such in
terms of seeing their you know where
they're making their errors and stuff
with early on in the day or later in
their days and
up like that but we also has on trapeze
and executives are as parents we all can
make it certain on decisions and that's
why you know people like Mark Zuckerberg
or Tony Hsieh they were the same
t-shirts and and sweatshirts all the
time because they don't want to spend
you know use up one of their decisions
thinking all what am I going to wear
today right right
so my goal is to streamline my life put
the routine the first hour day and the
last hours a day I really micromanage to
the point where it's pitch well I don't
even have to think about it and then
because those are the times a day where
I could really have the most impact
later on in the middle day you know team
members need that there's firefighting
this client needs that but the first
hour the last hour I really want to
control so all this really helped
develop grit and resilience you know in
my body so I could have the ability to
persevere and I so I a stand guard to my
brain all the time what goes in and I
don't watch so I like a lot of the
negative news and all the young market I
really focus like you know I watch I
listen to your show and maybe a handful
of little of things I read each day
because I need to keep it positive
I want hope and I'm looking for help I'm
looking for inspiration and also
instruction so before I asked the last
question working these guys find you
online at the best place is actually our
podcast his quick brain kwi Kay brain
it's really my last name I didn't change
it to do what I did my father's name my
grandfather's name but um this is a new
venture for us we published a couple
episodes a week and it's really every
episode is less than 20 minutes it's to
be able to say that to see these are
brain hacks or busy people who want to
learn faster and achieve more everything
from read a book a week to remember
people's names to my top 10 favorite
brain foods
how to eliminate or add new habits
that's the best place people go to quick
brain calm and they could join a private
Facebook group there and post questions
for future episodes and also download
free we give them a hundred dollars
worth of brain training as a gift or any
social media you know I love our social
media you anything at Jim quick on
Twitter Instagram or Facebook life
what's the impact that you want to have
on the world what is the impact I want
to have on the world so our team doesn't
worse we're small in the
but we're really big on purpose like
yourself we don't measured and billions
of dollars but billions of brains really
light me up you know
you know billions of brains and minds
coming online you know being their best
version of themselves that's that's
really that's really the mission is to
change for people's personal education
system and how people fall in love with
their brains again you know I think that
if people want creator that your brain
it would directly controls your your
your levels of intelligence your level
of influence confidence with people your
level of income and also your level of
impact so we want to we want billions of
brains to come online and create a world
collectively that the future generations
can really on private oh my god brother
thank you so much for getting on the
show man guys this is somebody who has a
degree of being a tactician that you
have to see to believe to know that he
started out truly with a learning
disability and didn't just Klaus way
back to normal becomes one of the most
world recognized experts in the field of
cognitive improvement it's literally one
of the most amazing examples of grit
perseverance and a strong mission of
knowing why he's doing what he's doing
and wanting to give back and using that
desire to help other people as a way to
push through the dark times and man like
this poor guys the number of times that
he's had to redouble down come back to
his belief system and continue to push
through when he and I first met he was
really at the beginning of his journey
of struggling with the sleep problem and
knowing him socially first and then
hearing the private struggle that he was
in it was a really interesting time to
ask how does this play out is this
somebody that really is going to walk
the walk and keep pushing and do the 400
things that it takes to actually see
incremental improvement or is this going
to be somebody that ultimately taps out
and that belief ends up getting choked
just by the unrelenting nature of the
problem and to see him continue to push
for years and years
and really come out the other side and
be in a position where he's able to
through the things that he believes
through his behaviors through his
identity continue to push through even
when I think a vast majority of the
world would give up it just speaks to
why he's been successful in this arena
for so long and it's such a level it
absolutely incredible to spend time with
you men
thanking you so much for coming on guys
check it out we don't regret it and if
you haven't already be sure to subscribe
and until next time my friends be
legendary everybody thanks so much for
joining us for another episode of impact
Theory if this content is adding value
to your life our one ask is that you go
to iTunes and stitcher and rate and
review not only does that help us build
this community which at the end of the
day is all we care about but it also
helps us get even more amazing guests on
here to show their knowledge with all of
us thank you guys so much for being a
part of this community and until next
time be legendary my friends
[Music]